First draft (#281)
vespa-engine/blog: _posts/2023-03-29-semantic-search-with-multi-vector-indexing.md

vectors per document, some changes were made to the implementation.

The HNSW index consists of a navigable small world graph in a
hierarchy. A graph node corresponds to a single vector in the
document corpus, and is uniquely identified by a _nodeid_. A graph
node exists in 1 to N layers. On each layer, graph nodes are linked
to other nodes that are close in the vector space according to the
[distance
metric](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/reference/schema-reference.html#distance-metric).

The vectors are stored in a tensor field
[attribute](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/attributes.html), and the HNSW
index references these vectors when doing distance calculations.
Each document in the corpus is assigned a unique _docid_, and this
_docid_ is used when accessing the vector(s) from the tensor field
attribute. The HNSW index uses different internal structures based
on the tensor type of the tensor field.

![Graph](/assets/2023-03-29-semantic-search-with-multi-vector-indexing/image4.png "image_tooltip")
<font size="3"><i>Illustration showing how a set of graph nodes are linked together
on each layer in the graph hierarchy. Graph nodes are stored in a

> vector data structure where the nodeid provides direct lookup. When

Reviewer: ```suggestion
vector data structure where the _nodeid_ provides direct lookup. When
```

indexing multiple vectors per document, extra metadata is stored
per graph node to uniquely access the vector from the tensor field

> attribute. In addition, a structure mapping from docid to nodeids

Reviewer: ```suggestion
attribute. In addition, a structure mapping from _docid_ to _nodeids_
```

The _nodeid_ that identifies a graph node is always equal to the
_docid_, which is used when accessing the vector from the tensor
field attribute. No extra metadata is stored per graph node.

### Multiple vectors per document

The tensor type is mixed with one mapped dimension and one indexed
dimension, e.g. `tensor<float>(p{}, x[384])`.

In this case the _nodeid_ is no longer equal to the _docid_, and
an additional mapping structure is maintained. When inserting the
vectors of a new document into the HNSW index, a set of graph nodes
with corresponding unique _nodeids_ are allocated. Each graph node
stores the tuple _{docid, vectorid}_ as metadata. This is used when
accessing the vector corresponding to that graph node from the
tensor attribute field. The _vectorid_ is a number in the range
_[0, num-vectors-for-that-document>_. When removing the vectors of
a document from the HNSW index, the mapping from _docid_ to set of
_nodeids_ is used to find the graph nodes to be removed.

The greedy search algorithm that finds the K closest neighbors to
a query vector is slightly altered compared to the single-vector
case. The greedy search continues until graph nodes with K unique

> _docids_ are found. Among these the graph node (vector), each _docid_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each _docid_, the graph node (vector) that is
```

documents.

## Performance Considerations

To measure the performance implications of indexing multiple vectors
per document the [wikipedia-22-12-simple-embeddings](https://huggingface.co/datasets/Cohere/wikipedia-22-12-simple-embeddings)
dataset was used. This consists of 485851 paragraphs across 187340
Wikipedia articles. Each text paragraph was converted to a
384-dimensional vector embedding using the
[minilm-l6-v2](https://cloud.vespa.ai/en/model-hub#available-models)
transformer model using Vespa’s [embedder
](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/embedding.html#bertbase-embedder)functionality.
Two schemas were created and corresponding feed files. In both setups, the size of the dataset was 746 MB (485851 * 384 * 4).

* Paragraph: 485851 documents with one vector embedding (paragraph)
per document.  
* Article 187340 documents with multiple vector
embeddings (paragraphs) per document, 2.59 vectors on average per document.

The performance tests were executed on a [AWS EC2
c6id.metal](https://aws.amazon.com/ec2/instance-types/c6i/) instance
with 128 vCPUs, 256 GB Memory, and 4x1900 NVMe SSD. 64 vCPUs were
reserved for the test. The following was measured:

> * Total feed time and throughput.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Total feed time and write throughput.  
```

single vector representation models that perform pooling of the
output vectors into a single vector representation. Multi-vector
representations have demonstrated higher generalizability than
single-vector models in a zero-shot search ranking setting. With
multi-vector indexing support, it’s straightforward to implement
end-to-end retrieval using ColBERT with Vespa, while previously,
one could only use ColBERT as a re-ranking model.
<pre>
field colbert_tokens type tensor&lt;float&gt;(t{}, x[128]) 
</pre>

### Word2Vec

[Word2vec](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Word2vec) is one of the
early ways to use neural networks for text search and classification.
Unlike the more recent Transformer-based variants where word vectors
are contextualized by self-attention, the word vector representation
of a word does not change depending on other words in the text.
With multi-vector indexing, it’s trivial to represent word vectors
in Vespa.
<pre>
field word2vec type tensor&lt;float&gt;(word{}, x[300]) 
</pre>

## Multi-modal product search

Multi-vector indexing is particularly useful for product and
[e-commerce applications
](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/use-case-shopping.html)where the product

> has lots of metadata to[

Reviewer: ```suggestion
has lots of metadata to [
```

filter](https://blog.vespa.ai/constrained-approximate-nearest-neighbor-search/)
and rank on and where the product metadata is [constantly
evolving](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/partial-updates.html#use-cases).

Using vector representations of product images, produced by
[text-to-image](https://blog.vespa.ai/text-image-search/) models
like [CLIP](https://openai.com/research/clip) has become a popular
method for improving product search. With Vespa multi-vector indexing,
e-commerce applications can easily search multiple product photos
without introducing fan-out complexity. Vespa also allows using
multi-vector indexing for multiple fields in the same schema.

<pre>
field image_clip_embeddings type tensor&lt;float&gt;(i{}, x[512])
field product_bullet_embeddings type tensor&lt;bfloat16&gt;(p{},x[384])
field product_embedding type tensor&lt;int8&gt;(x[256])
</pre>

> Using multiple_ nearestNeighbor_ search query operators in the same

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using multiple_ nearestNeighbor_ query operators in the same
```

query request, coupled with a ranking function, e-commerce apps can

> retrieving efficiently over multiple vector fields and expose the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
retrieve efficiently over multiple vector fields and expose the
```
